MON-2909: add instrumentation page (#74)
rhobs/handbook: content/Products/OpenshiftMonitoring/instrumentation.md

# Instrumentation guidelines

This document details good practices to adopt when you instrument your application for Prometheus. It is not meant to be a replacement of the [upstream documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/instrumentation/) but an introduction focused on the OpenShift use case.

## Targeted audience

This document is intended for OpenShift developers that want to instrument their operators and operands for Prometheus.

## Getting started

To instrument software written in Golang, see the official [Golang client](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/prometheus/client_golang). For other languages, refer to the [curated list](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/clientlibs/#client-libraries) of client libraries.

Prometheus stores all data as time series which are a stream of timestamped values (samples) identified by a metric name and a set of unique labels (a.ka. dimensions or key/value pairs). Its data model is described in details in this [page](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/). Time series would be represented like this:

```
http_requests_total{method="GET", handler="/messages"}  500

> http_requests_total{method="POST", handler="/messages"} 10

Reviewer: I know from a data model perspective this is correct. In reality user will also see 
```
# HELP
# TYPE
```
Do you think it would be too detailed to mention that in this doc?

Author: Nope it makes sense. I'll add it.

* [Kubernetes metric instrumentation guide](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-instrumentation/metric-instrumentation.md)
* [Instrumenting a Go application for Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/go-application/)

## Example

Here is a fictional Go code example instrumented with a Gauge metric and a multi-dimensional Counter metric:

```golang
	cpuTemp := prometheus.NewGauge(prometheus.GaugeOpts{
		Name: "cpu_temperature_celsius",
		Help: "Current temperature of the CPU.",
	})

	hdFailures := prometheus.NewCounterVec(
		prometheus.CounterOpts{
			Name: "hd_errors_total",
			Help: "Number of hard-disk errors.",
		},
		[]string{"device"},
	)}

	reg := prometheus.NewRegistry()
	reg.MustRegister(cpuTemp, m.hdFailures)

	cpuTemp.Set(55.2)

	// Record 1 failure for the /dev/sda device.
	hdFailures.With(prometheus.Labels{"device":"/dev/sda"}).Inc()
	// Record 3 failures for the /dev/sdb device.
	hdFailures.With(prometheus.Labels{"device":"/dev/sdb"}).Inc()
	hdFailures.With(prometheus.Labels{"device":"/dev/sdb"}).Inc()
	hdFailures.With(prometheus.Labels{"device":"/dev/sdb"}).Inc()
```

## Labels

> Defining when to add and when not to add a label to a metric is a [difficult choice](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/instrumentation/#use-labels). In general refrain from adding too many labels (or too many label values: every unique set of label names and values creates a new time series and Prometheus memory usage is mostly driven by the number of live times series (which are stored in RAM). A good rule of thumb is to have less than 10 time series per metric name and per target. A beginner mistake is to store information such as username, IP address or error messages into a label which can lead to thousands of time series.

Reviewer: Yeah this is tricky to make succinct.
```suggestion
Defining when to add and when not to add a label to a metric is a [difficult choice](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/instrumentation/#use-labels). The general rule is: the fewer labels, the better. Every unique combination of label names and values creates a new time series and Prometheus memory usage is mostly driven by the number of times series loaded into RAM during ingestion and querying. A good rule of thumb is to have less than 10 time series per metric name and target. A common mistake is to store dynamic information such as usernames, IP addresses or error messages into a label which can lead to thousands of time series.
```
